## Foreword

Minecraft is a game that has thrived in part due to its community. I've been a part of the Minecraft server community for well over a decade as of publishing, and I've seen the community grow and change many times over. In 2020, for the tenth anniversary of the launch of multiplayer, I decided to write a comprehensive history of the Minecraft server community. With help from many community members, many of whom have had a large part in shaping the events that I've written about in this book, I've compiled this comprehensive history of the Minecraft server community's first decade.

This book was [originally published as a blog article](https://madelinemiller.dev/blog/decade-of-minecraft-multiplayer/) on the 4th of August 2020, the tenth anniversary of survival multiplayer in Minecraft. I've chosen to publish this as an eBook due to numerous requests over the years for an offline-readable version of the article. While the following chapters have been edited and expanded to include more information and improve the flow, care was taken to ensure that the book remains true to the time it was originally posted.

In saying that, if there is anything we have missed that you feel substantially impacted the survival multiplayer ecosystem, please [contact me.](https://madelinemiller.dev/contact/) Also, while we’ve tried our hardest to make sure these dates are accurate and cited. As with anything historical, it is not always possible to be entirely accurate due to conflicting or lost sources. If you find something that you can verify is incorrect, please [let me know](https://madelinemiller.dev/contact/) and I’ll make sure to get it fixed.
