# 2012 - The introduction of Forks and Other Cutlery

## Admincraft

On the 12th of January 2012, [/u/theheyway](https://www.reddit.com/user/theheyway) created a new Minecraft community subreddit, [/r/admincraft](https://www.reddit.com/r/admincraft). The subreddit existed to discuss all things relating to Minecraft server administration, from how to run a server, to the discussion of plugin development. The admincraft community has since grown also to include a Discord and is one of the most widely known server administrator communities.

## Shotbow Network

The Shotbow Minecraft server network was formed during February 2012 and is recognised as the oldest Minecraft server network. Not only did Shotbow first introduce the concept of a centralised hub server that let players join minigames, but they also created the popular MineZ minigame. MineZ, based on the DayZ mod for Arma 2, quickly became one of the most popular Minecraft game modes of all time, even getting recognition outside of the Minecraft multiplayer community.

## Bukkit x Mojang

In [late 2011](https://bukkit.org/threads/bukkit-visits-mojang.51035/), the Bukkit team was invited to Mojang for discussions around the future of Minecraft modding. At the time, very little was publicly known about what they discussed. On the [28th of February 2012](https://bukkit.org/threads/bukkit-the-next-chapter.62489/), EvilSeph made a post to the Bukkit forums in which he explained that the Bukkit team had been hired by Mojang to work on an official modding API for Minecraft. Dinnerbone provided a [thorough FAQ](https://bukkit.org/threads/bukkit-the-next-chapter.62489/page-9#post-990129) where he reassured the community that Bukkit was not going anywhere and that Bukkit plugins would be mostly compatible with the future Minecraft modding API. While the modding API never materialised, the addition of the Bukkit team to Mojang significantly influenced the direction of the game. Contributions made by the team, especially some of the internal technical changes by Grum, are part of the reason that the game is so different now than it was in 2012.

Following the original Bukkit team’s hire by Mojang, Bukkit brought on a few new developers to keep the project alive. On the [31st of March 2012](https://bukkit.org/threads/the-status-of-bukkit.68104/), fieldmaster and Wolverness were brought onto the team. A few weeks later on the [24th of April](https://bukkit.org/threads/bukkit-project-update-slow-development-addition-to-the-team.72397/) Amaranth joined as well, with mbaxter and evilmidget38 to follow after that.

## Increments and Decrements of CraftBukkit

In May of 2012, a new trend emerged where developers were publishing modified versions of the CraftBukkit software, and the Bukkit team was having trouble keeping them out of the forums.

### CraftBukkit++

Afforess, working on behalf of HeroCraft, started work on a modified version of CraftBukkit that aimed to improve server performance significantly. This fork, known as CraftBukkit++ and released on the Spout forums, introduced some of the significant performance improvements that are seen in both [Spigot and Paper today](https://madelinemiller.dev/blog/paper-vs-spigot/). These features were initially being trialled for inclusion within CraftBukkit itself, in a private version of the Bukkit-Bleeding project. They were, however, ultimately scrapped due to making slight changes to vanilla Minecraft behaviour. After this point, the Bukkit team opted to remain faithful to vanilla behaviour rather than implement performance improvements that would require deviating from them.

### CraftBukkit--

Very shortly after CraftBukkit++ was released, the project was abandoned. EcoCityCraft wanted to keep the project alive and had md_5 and a few of their other developers work on a continuation of CraftBukkit++. A new project was then released under the name CraftBukkit--, chosen as a parody of CraftBukkit++. Unlike CraftBukkit++, this project had longevity.

An attempt was also made to turn [CraftBukkit-- into a Bukkit plugin](https://github.com/BukkitDevTeam/Spigot-Plugin). While some progress had been made on the plugin version, the project was ultimately scrapped due to difficulties with making certain changes. md_5 has also planned to create a custom server similar to Glowstone that implemented the official Minecraft modding API, known as [Fondue](https://github.com/BukkitDevTeam/Fondue). As the modding API never materialised, neither did md_5’s project.

## Plots

On the [2nd of June 2012](https://bukkit.org/threads/wgen-sec-plotme-v0-9-plot-generation-and-protection-1-3-r1-0.78840/), ZachBora released PlotMe. PlotMe was the first significant plot world generator plugin, inspiring what is now the basis of almost all creative servers. Initially, plot worlds found their use as protected building space in other game modes, such as prison.

### OP Prison

Alongside the ability to create plot worlds, Prison servers underwent another evolution. Prison servers were generally viewed as very “grindy” in terms of gameplay, usually requiring hours of mining to level up to a slightly nicer cell block, only to then go through the same process again. While this appealed to many people, alongside the inherent roleplay aspect, many newer players found this boring. This led to the creation of the “OP Prison” game mode, where high enchantments were often applied to tools and currencies were highly inflated. It was also common to earn or purchase multipliers and various buffs to speed up the process further. These servers usually were more aimed at aspects such as PvP, plot building, or economy, with the Prison theme and cell blocks more acting as central hubs for players to mine and socialise.

## Proxy Time

md_5 and Codename_B set out to work on a new proxy software for the Minecraft server. There was a growing demand for chaining multiple servers together, which existing proxies like CraftProxy were not directly capable of doing. In August 2012, the projects RubberBand and RubberBukkit were released. RubberBand, [named by Codename_B](https://paste.gg/p/zml/88b3f210f2e448a3a59ade0973996b2b) as it flings you between servers, was a proxy with rudimentary support for chaining multiple servers together. It had a fatal flaw; it required using a modified version of CraftBukkit known as RubberBukkit to work. This flaw led to the project failing to gain much adoption.

md_5 started work on building software around RubberBand and created a suite of software known as the Elastic Portal Suite. At the same time, he began work on a follow-up to the RubberBand proxy to address some of the main issues in the software. On the [4th of October 2012](https://github.com/SpigotMC/BungeeCord/commit/b876fb2e1bd395c37f47b020c2f0e778812c0c61), md_5 started the BungeeCord project. BungeeCord was a successor to RubberBand and a part of the Elastic Portal Suite. BungeeCord was faster, had a plugin API, and didn’t require a modified version of CraftBukkit to work. It was named BungeeCord in reference to the prior RubberBand software, due to bungee cords being big and powerful rubber bands. BungeeCord was the first significant public server proxy that allowed combining individual servers into a single Minecraft network and is still used to this day.
