# 2015 to 2017 - The Era of Stagnation

## Essentials reborn

During the DMCA debacle, the Essentials project had been abandoned for Bukkit. There had been [plans for Me4502 to continue the Essentials project for Sponge](https://github.com/essentials/Essentials/commit/11b39b4ef68666ad72b7b57e02eda7049f323adb); however, due to other projects taking priority and the release of other command plugins for Sponge, this never happened. On the [15th of April 2015](https://github.com/EssentialsX/Essentials/commit/dde0b20775c3b9a82f62d381e0d827f49313f46d) however, drtshock started the EssentialsX project as a continuation of Essentials for Bukkit. EssentialsX quickly filled the void Essentials left and became almost as widely used.

## SpongeVanilla

In early 2015 the Granite project continued to grow, and gained many fans from within the Sponge staff. After many discussions between the Sponge team and the Granite team, it was decided to bring Granite officially into the Sponge ecosystem and rebrand it SpongeVanilla. On the [21st of April 2015](https://github.com/SpongePowered/SpongeVanilla/commit/877044fbee4697ef189eaa3f17119f352eaeffdc), Granite’s codebase had officially become SpongeVanilla. To make SpongeVanilla and SpongeForge more similar, they were set up to share a majority codebase under the name SpongeCommon.

## DragonProxy

DragonProxy was an early attempt by DefinitelyEvil to allow players of Minecraft Bedrock Edition to connect to Minecraft Java Edition multiplayer servers. The project was officially started on the [11th of December 2015](https://github.com/WeaveMN/DragonProxy/commit/b0510e930497c82d1ada422b84e41144b5194943). While the project worked as a proof of concept, numerous issues prevented it from being used on any serious server. Due to this, the project was abandoned relatively quickly.

## Waterfall

Due to some disagreements and issues surrounding the BungeeCord project, a fork under the name Waterfall was made by minecrafter on the [25th of January 2016](https://github.com/WaterfallMC/Waterfall-Old/commit/a27f55af963bf9502dd5c69ca89c9ada6a65e0b6). Waterfall aimed to improve stability, performance, compatibility with non-Spigot servers, and be more open to community contributions.

## EULA Enforcement

Around the [24th of February 2016](https://www.reddit.com/r/Minecraft/comments/47bt3r/mojang_are_starting_to_crack_down_on_servers/), Mojang started to enforce the game’s End User License Agreement on servers that allowed users to purchase anything that impacted gameplay. Any server that did not comply with the EULA risked being blacklisted by Mojang, preventing the Minecraft client from connecting. This was major in the server community at the time, as almost all servers were breaking the EULA. Most server owners slowly changed their stores to comply with the EULA, while a few others used workarounds to prevent themselves from being blacklisted. Overall, this majorly changed how profitable running a Minecraft server could be.

## The Combat Update and Protocol Compatibility

Minecraft 1.9 was released on the [29th of February 2016](https://minecraft.wiki/w/wiki/Java_Edition_1.9). This release, also known as “The Combat Update”, was the first update to create a significant divide in the community. While some versions prior had remained popular within niche communities for various reasons, this was the first time an update had significant sustained backlash. A vocal minority of players rejected the changes to combat and preferred to stay on Minecraft 1.8, never updating beyond that version.

[At the same time](https://github.com/ViaVersion/ViaVersion/commit/67b31c50608937df1d21bba5239132dad50a2c82), FormallyMyles began development on a plugin known as ViaVersion. ViaVersion allowed newer versions of the Minecraft client to connect to an older version of the server, mainly to allow servers more time to update without risking significant loss of players. As server software took time to release updates, and plugins took more time on top of that, ViaVersion helped solve an issue that had plagued server owners for years.

Due to the dislike of Minecraft 1.9, some servers decided that they would continue using ViaVersion for the considerable future, rather than ever updating. To this day, there are still some PvP-oriented servers that have not updated past Minecraft 1.8.

## LuckPerms

On the [21st of May 2016](https://github.com/LuckPerms/LuckPerms/commit/dc1e06ebcef4886568af1378ffeff406a5408428), lucko started the LuckPerms project. LuckPerms was a new permissions plugin that developed on many of the learnings in the permissions space over the years and supported multiple platforms. It could be installed on Bukkit, Sponge, and even BungeeCord. LuckPerms also had a web interface to set up permissions from the browser. To this day, LuckPerms is used by a vast majority of servers due to its ease of use and versatility.
