## 2018 to 2020 - The Era of Change

### Minecraft 1.13, The Flattening

Minecraft 1.13 released on the [18th of July 2018](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Java_Edition_1.13). Like Minecraft 1.9, this update was highly divisive. Core parts of the game were rewritten and all block and item IDs changed, creating [significant obstacles when updating plugins](https://madelinemiller.dev/blog/updating-3-of-the-largest-minecraft-plugins-in-existence-to-113/) and servers. On top of this, server performance had decreased substantially. Unlike Minecraft 1.9, this divide in the community was caused by server admins rather than players. To this day, some servers are still on Minecraft 1.12.

### Velocity and Waterfall

Frustrated by how limited Waterfall was due to the need to retain BungeeCord compatibility, Tux, the original creator of Waterfall, decided to create a new proxy project. On the [24th of July](https://github.com/PaperMC/Velocity/commit/666d07e2a8c26b35a68c7c711f83d2193b27c749), development for Velocity started. Velocity aimed to avoid the pitfalls that BungeeCord had and provide an improved API along with better performance. After Velocity launched, Tux transferred the Waterfall project to Paper on the [29th of September](https://discordapp.com/channels/289587909051416579/492517675680006144/495706929306271764), allowing them to maintain it.

### Fabric

Towards the end of 2018, the Fabric project officially started. Built to fill the gap left by Forge’s slow update, Fabric aimed to be a much simpler mod loader akin to Risugami’s Modloader from the early days of modding. Due to its simplicity, Fabric has been used for many smaller Minecraft servers that don’t need software as complex as Spigot or Paper, or for servers that want to support Minecraft snapshot releases. Fabric is also a very community-orientated process, using community tools like Sponge’s Mixin framework.

### Bedrock Compatibility, Take Two

Due to the issues with the earlier attempt at a Bedrock compatibility layer proxy, DragonProxy, another developer made an attempt to rewrite it. The goal of the rewrite was to support the Bedrock protocol in a more straightforward manner, making it easier to maintain and achieve feature parity. This project started on the [10th of October 2018](https://github.com/DragonetMC/DragonProxy/commit/dab11e1e123b171bfe5f5dcf8748a646262427c7), led by Luukey.

Almost a year later, another proxy project known as GeyserMC started on the 9th of July 2019, led by RednedEpic. The project eventually went on to absorb DragonProxy and became the community standard for Bedrock compatibility proxies. While it works very well, there are still some minor issues due to the way Bedrock and Java Edition behave differently.

### Official Obfuscation Mappings

To make modding easier, Mojang announced on the 4th of September 2019 that they would be releasing official obfuscation mappings alongside Minecraft releases from now on. This release gave modders a better understanding about what Mojang intended various parts of the code to do. However, due to unclear legal terms surrounding the releases, this is currently only useful for personal use or reference purposes. Releasing a project that uses these mappings is in a legal grey area. In theory, once all legal issues are resolved, projects such as Yarn (Fabric) and MCP (Forge) would no longer need to create their own mappings.

### Revised Commercial Usage Guidelines

On the 17th of April 2020, Mojang revised the commercial usage guidelines of the game to allow servers to monetise more than just cosmetic changes. This change partially reverts the restrictions added when enforcement of the EULA commenced. The new restrictions allow selling packages that impact gameplay, as long as they do not give the player a “competitive gameplay advantage”.
