# 2011 - The Golden Era of Bukkit

## The launch of Bukkit

As 2011 kicked off, the Bukkit project was officially released with an announcement thread on the [Minecraft Forums on the 1st of January](https://www.minecraftforum.net/forums/mapping-and-modding-java-edition/minecraft-tools/1260642-introducing-bukkit-a-new-minecraft-server-mod). Bukkit was designed from the ground up to address many of the issues that plagued hMod users and plugin developers. It was intended to be significantly easier to develop plugins for, as well as to run much faster. There were a few features that were not brought over from hMod however, such as inbuilt admin commands and a permissions system. Overall the community reaction to the announcement was highly positive, with most respondents mostly wanting to know when their favourite plugins such as CraftBook or Runecraft were moving over.

To make up for the lack of hMod’s inbuilt features, the Bukkit project created a set of plugins to add basic admin commands, a home system, and a chat system. The plugins were named [ScrapBukkit](https://github.com/Bukkit/ScrapBukkit), [HomeBukkit](https://github.com/Bukkit/HomeBukkit), and [ChatBukkit](https://github.com/Bukkit/ChatBukkit), respectively. Rather than being “official”, these were released just like any other plugin. These weren’t intended for long term use, but more to act as both a stopgap solution for the hMod users who expected these features to come with Bukkit, and as a suite of example plugins for developers to look at while developing their own plugins.

One of the planned key features of Bukkit that was announced was the Fill plugin repository. This repository was designed to go alongside commands within the Bukkit software that would allow server admins to install, update, and uninstall plugins all from within their server. Not much progress was made on this, however, and the project never saw the light of day. The Bukkit forums were used instead for plugin releases.

The Bukkit team also expanded at this point, to include others such as lukegb, GoMySQL, and more. Their primary role on the Bukkit project was managing infrastructure.

While highly active early on, sk89q did not stay with the Bukkit team for long. Many major decisions that have stuck with the Bukkit project and community since were led by him, however, such as the usage of YAML for configuration and the service loader system. He also made many changes to make plugins like CraftBook and WorldGuard more capable, such as the inclusion of `BlockPhysicsEvent`/`BlockRedstoneEvent`, the vehicle system, and partial cause tracking to many events. As of writing, sk89q is still the 4th biggest committer to the original Bukkit project despite leaving the team before the end of 2011.

In the early days, community members were involved in many meaningful discussions around how the project should run. One such debate was around which software licenses Bukkit and CraftBukkit would use. Bukkit was licensed under GPL and CraftBukkit under LGPL. While the license was noted to not be valid due to the [intent of usage with proprietary code](https://bukkit.org/threads/what-license-is-the-bukkit-project-under.154/page-2#post-2824), this did have the implication that all plugins built using the Bukkit API were required to be GPL. EvilSeph did state that the Bukkit team would never enforce the license. However, this does not prevent other Bukkit contributors from requiring enforcement. To this day, the theory that all Bukkit plugins must be licensed under the GPL has never been tested in court.

## CanaryMod

While most of the community switched to Bukkit, there was still a core group that remained faithful to the hMod platform. On the [3rd of March 2011](https://github.com/shadow386/CanaryMod/commit/38e01aee716ab6c513313eb8ad24905fa99217a5), shadow386 rebranded their hMod continuation fork to CanaryMod. CanaryMod improved on the API of hMod in many ways, rather than entirely starting over like the Bukkit project. CanaryMod also borrowed parts of the Bukkit API, leading it to partially resemble both hMod and Bukkit. The team also kept up a small number of plugins, generally forks of all of the original plugins but updated by different authors. The primary user of CanaryMod was the MinecraftOnline server, due to having started during the hMod era.

## Dawn of the Proxies

On the [9th of January](https://github.com/Raphfrk/CraftProxy/commit/a36c2a552efd299044f2af28a7a4fa9a946d914a), Raphfrk made the first of their three proxies. And thus, CraftProxy, the first ever Minecraft server proxy was born. However, it functioned somewhat differently from what came after it. Its purpose was not to allow a player to switch between servers in-game like is typical of modern proxies, but instead to host multiple Minecraft servers on the same machine while still using the default port. For example, you could host both a creative.server.com, and survival.server.com from the same device, and it’d forward the user to the correct server based on what URL they use to connect. These still functioned as independent servers from the player’s perspective.

Later, Raphfrk rewrote CraftProxy twice. First under the name CraftProxyLite and later CraftProxyLiter. These rewrites both improved performance and added new features, such as protocol compression. Both of these proxies still behaved in a similar manner to CraftProxy however, having a different purpose to modern proxies.

## Griefer YouTube

As with any multiplayer video game, Minecraft servers were vulnerable to griefing, where someone enjoys intentionally annoying or disrupting other players rather than playing the game. In Minecraft, this primarily took the form of destroying terrain, builds, or targeting and killing players. Perhaps the most infamous of the griefers were Team Avolition, who uploaded their first Minecraft griefing video onto YouTube on the 9th of January 2011. They were most well-known for finding servers from Reddit, and griefing or trolling with a custom-made cheat client. Team Avolition quickly gained a cult following amongst a section of the community and inspired a wave of griefing YouTube channels and cheat client developers. They also sparked a feud with Reddit and became infamous for repeatedly griefing the NerdNu series of servers.

## The Early Bukkit Plugins

Right after Bukkit’s launch, plugin developers were hard at work on creating new Bukkit plugins. Most of the large hMod plugins were quickly ported, including all the ones listed in this post. There was also a flood of new plugins, especially with many beginner developers feeling empowered by Bukkit’s simpler developer experience.

On the [3rd of January 2011](https://github.com/taylorkelly/BigBrother/commit/a34cb8d6718d3ba1c4299da38d92707a2ba1a0ee), the BigBrother project was started by Taylor Kelly. BigBrother, like LogBlock, was a plugin that logged block changes by players. BigBrother was the first block logging plugin to be available for Bukkit, with a port of the LogBlock plugin from hMod following shortly after.

Nijikokun, the developer of iConomy, started work on a plugin to fill the void that the lack of general admin commands in Bukkit left in the community. On the [5th of January 2011](https://github.com/nijikokun/General/commit/c9796e3abfa7fd5797f5cd0c9ccd07b3825766cd) he unveiled his solution to the problem, with a plugin named General. On the [19th of January 2011](https://bukkit.org/threads/gen-essentials-v2-1.1262/), Zenexer started another similar project under the name of GeneReal, a spoof on the name General. This then sparked a public argument between Nijikokun and Zenexer on the GeneReal forum thread. Shortly after, the General plugin was abandoned, and GeneReal was renamed to Essentials.

The MinecartMania plugin started development on the [13th of January 2011](https://github.com/Mattie/MinecartMania/commit/9702d9f9a72489db4a46788b2e11981c4d95b6af), led by Afforess. MinecartMania aimed to expand upon what Minecarts could do within Minecraft. While MinecartMania itself only added a few features, it relied heavily upon extensions to the base plugin that added anything from automated Minecart spawners to automatic farming with Minecarts. It gained quick popularity, as the highly popular minecart features of CraftBook would not be available on Bukkit for a short while after MinecartMania was released.

Shadeness ported Towny from hMod to Bukkit as early as [February 4th 2011](https://www.bukkit.org/threads/sec-fun-info-towny-v0-59-resident-town-nation-hierarchy-grid-based-protection-531.3358/). After taking a leave of absence, ElgarL took over the project on [July 18th 2011](https://github.com/TownyAdvanced/Towny/commit/6072ffe9a0a5f9110905ba8ef4a83fa52cb8cf76). ElgarL later left the community alongside the release of Minecraft 1.8, and Towny has been developed by LlmDl since.

On the [12th of February 2011](https://bukkit.org/threads/econ-chestshop-3-7-18-iconomychestshop-chest-sign-shop-for-economy-plugins-1-8.4150/), Acrobat released the iConomyChestShop plugin. While initially only supporting iConomy, this plugin allowed players to sell and buy items using in-game currency by clicking a sign on a chest. This concept, while ubiquitous on servers now, was novel at the time and significantly improved the gameplay experience of Economy Minecraft servers. The plugin was later renamed to ChestShop once it gained support for other economy plugins after the release of Vault.

On the [14th of February 2011](https://bukkit.org/threads/sec-lockette-simple-chest-and-door-lock-no-databases-moved-to-bukkitdev.4336/), Acru released the Lockette plugin. Lockette was similar to LWC in functionality but had a crucial difference in that it used signs for protecting blocks, rather than commands and a database. This difference was a big deal to many server owners, due to the simplicity of not having to setup their server with a database.

The DynamicMarket project was started on the [21st of February 2011](https://github.com/HaloInverse/DynamicMarket/commit/0bfedee6b910cb3b78eca64d67af545adbf1b8b3) by HaloInverse and was the first shop plugin that adjusted the price of items based on supply and demand. This plugin has a very different concept to most of the shop plugins at the time and helped start a few of the first economy servers. While this was an interesting concept and very novel, it didn’t catch on too well overall.

The first permissions plugin for Bukkit started development on the [22nd of February 2011](https://github.com/nijikokun/Permissions/commit/f4be0bceb7688df661a92d35c8c17a5e7489707f); created by Nijikokun and aptly called Permissions. This plugin aimed to bring a re-imagined version of hMod’s permission system to Bukkit. Permissions was a dominant player in the permission plugin space for a large portion of the early days of Bukkit, and helped shape the way permissions in Minecraft servers work today.

Also on the [22nd of February](https://github.com/Multiverse/Multiverse-Core/commit/68107d9df8eee267bb3ff245a439f9ac5ce8ec6c), Simon Rigby started work on the MultiVerse project. MultiVerse allowed servers to have multiple worlds that players could travel between using commands. This project sparked a trend in the server community where servers would have secondary worlds, usually for mining or events. MultiVerse eventually had add-on plugins released, such as MultiVerse-Portals that allowed construction of physical portals that the player could walk through, similar to nether portals.

Unhappy with the current state of command plugins, sk89q started work on his own. On the [1st of March 2011](https://github.com/EngineHub/CommandBook/commit/8dbdefe99f05c352f69e1ecca6bf00c46d8c8c8e), the [CommandBook](https://enginehub.org/commandbook) project started development. CommandBook had a focus on usability and strayed away from many of the less command-based systems that Essentials had. CommandBook was the first plugin ever to allow selectors such as `#near` to refer to nearby players or natural language such as `3am` to refer to a Minecraft time. Like his other plugins, he also made CommandBook depend on WorldEdit, which had started to take on the form of a small API library.

On the [18th of April 2011](https://github.com/PEXPlugins/PermissionsEx/commit/23319e20dc0d44e07c48f24e00586dc41edc4b5c), t3hk0d3 started work on another permissions plugin known as [PermissionsEx](https://dev.bukkit.org/projects/permissionsex). The introduction of a second permissions plugin caused turbulence in the Bukkit community, as most plugins only supported Nijikokun’s Permissions plugin. sk89q created a system known as [WEPIF](http://web.archive.org/web/20120904175159/http://wiki.sk89q.com/wiki/WEPIF) (WorldEdit Permissions Interoperability Framework) to handle the existence of multiple permissions plugins, but it never gained widespread usage outside of his plugins. The original PermissionsEx would continue to be maintained until 2017, and later zml2008 would begin a rewrite of PermissionsEx.

On the [1st of June](https://github.com/MCBans/MCBans/commit/1f5c89e843cacb43142705aacc42b17835e96248), work on the MCBans service was started by firestar. MCBans was a game-changer for server admins, allowing a global ban list to be created for repeatedly problematic players. MCBans allowed servers to prevent any player who had received a certain number of bans from joining their server, and let admins look up whether individual players had been banned in the past. MCBans was not the only service to offer this; the MCAdmin server wrapper had this feature as well. However, MCAdmin was surrounded by controversy. Griefing teams, such as [Team Avolition](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QtiL_pA2kDY), were exploiting the MCAdmin bans system to ban admins before going on to grief servers, and Doridian made himself unbannable after a similar issue. MCAdmin was not well trusted, but MCBans alleviated most of these concerns by being open source and having a system that was less prone to abuse.

Due to the rapidly growing number of economy, permissions, and chat plugins, cerealcable started work on a plugin that made it significantly easier for other plugins to support multiple of them at once. From this, the Vault project formed on the [28th of June](https://github.com/MilkBowl/Vault/commit/875e5f980c3c0e6b567afcfc2692cfc1dfdf1146). Prior to Vault, plugins had to separately provide support for every individual permission, economy, or chat plugin, leading to ecosystem clusters and conflicts that wouldn’t have existed otherwise. Vault is still widely used to this day and supports almost every major plugin.

On the 14th of August 2011, the Buycraft service launched. Buycraft made it easy for server admins to charge real money for in-game content. Frequent use cases were access to plugins, chat perks, or in-game currency. The introduction of monetisation on Minecraft servers massively shifted the server landscape, making it now possible for server admins to profit off the servers they ran, or at least try to offset hosting costs. Since then, the Buycraft service has been renamed to Tebex. The Bukkit plugin itself was rewritten by Tux and is now known as BuycraftX, paying homage to the historical roots of the service as well as marking a new era of the plugin.

## Server Lists

Due to the growing surge in the number of Minecraft servers coming into 2011, several sites started to pop up to make it easier for players to find servers and for servers to advertise to players. Prior to this, servers were generally listed on Reddit or the Minecraft Forums. In early January of 2011, a server list known as [MineStatus.net](https://minestatus.net/) launched, making it the oldest Minecraft server list that is still running today. Other server lists such as [minecraft-server-list.com](https://minecraft-server-list.com/) and [MinecraftServers.org](https://minecraftservers.org/) followed shortly after.

Initially, the list order was obtained by players voting for their favourite server once per day, but over time other methods to increase server visibility were added. The ability to pay for sponsored ad slots at the top of the server list were initially released on minestatus.net on the [10th of July 2011](https://twitter.com/minestatus/status/79037064150134784). For the longest time, server lists were the most common place to find a Minecraft server.

Minestatus.net would go on to create two plugins that would set an example for how server lists would operate. One of these, Votifier, was launched on the [19th of June 2011](https://github.com/vexsoftware/votifier/commit/8f766281d0287cf7ff847d1faa5c927b8567e2e9). This sparked a massive shift in the way servers would entice new players. Votifier allowed servers to incentivise votes from players on voting sites, which became common practice throughout the entire community for years to come. Sites that implemented Votifier support would notify the server when they received a vote, allowing them to automatically reward the player. While the rewards players received from voting have changed significantly over time, rewarding votes is still seen across most servers today. The plugin was maintained by the original authors until 2015. Today most servers use NuVotifier, a fork of the original Votifier started by Ichbinjoe and Tux that adds vote forwarding, support for Sponge, BungeeCord, and Velocity, and an improved protocol.

Minestatus.net also created another piece of foundational software for the server space, [MineQuery](http://web.archive.org/web/20110119001648/http://minestatus.net/minequery). MineQuery allowed external services such as websites to get information about a Minecraft server, such as whether it was online as well as current player counts and names. MineQuery later became redundant with the introduction of the query protocol to Minecraft 1.0, and the server list ping packet to Minecraft 1.3, integrating this functionality directly into Minecraft itself.

## Economy Servers

Due to the capabilities provided by the wide selection of economy plugins and those that allowed charging in-game currency, servers were popping up that took the current “Survival+” game style but with an added economy and trading system. Generally, these servers would be survival servers with plugins such as CraftBook or MinecartMania to add more complex and varied gameplay, with an added dash of capitalism. Many of these servers also had a town system, such as with the plugin Towny. Players would earn enough money to build a town by working in other towns, or selling things they gathered and then employ newer players to do various tasks.

The largest and longest-running Economy server was EcoCityCraft, which was launched on the 4th of April 2011 and is still running to this day. This server heavily influenced the economy game style.

### Prison Servers

The Economy server style also had numerous off-shoots, with the Prison style being one of the largest. Prison servers were styled around a prison with players roleplaying as a prisoner, with artificial constructed mines and other various ways to earn money to level up through different tiers of cell block. Further evolutions of the Prison game mode involved players eventually being able to buy their freedom and gain access to a normal Minecraft world, the ability for players to apply to be guards and confiscate contraband items, and the ability for players to buy a space they could build in from a prison cell to a large plot of land.

## BukkitContrib

Afforess started the BukkitContrib project on the [1st of May 2011](https://github.com/Nightgunner5/BukkitContrib/commit/eb22175c782c4dcae59908b59f12fe432d83d594). BukkitContrib was an extension to Bukkit that was installed as a plugin, which allowed plugin developers to create things beyond the limits of Bukkit. BukkitContrib also published a client mod, that when used would let plugins do things that generally would require mods. Plugins written with BukkitContrib could add new sounds, GUIs, and even give the impression of extra items and blocks using textures. None of these required installing any client mods beyond BukkitContrib, which was sent data from plugins by the servers that the player joined. A plugin that shows off what BukkitContrib was capable of is [Sprout](https://dev.bukkit.org/projects/sprout), which allows adding infinitely more crops to Minecraft.

On the [1st of August 2011](https://bukkit.org/threads/dev-spoutplugin-unleash-the-flow-of-endless-possibilities-1-0-1-3-2.29259/), BukkitContrib relaunched as Spoutcraft due to Bukkit cracking down on the usage of the Bukkit name in other projects. Soon after, sk89q and lahwran planned to make a competitor to Spoutcraft. Designs were made for various systems, but the project never went anywhere. A few of the designed systems ended up making their way into the WorldEdit API.

## Return of the Lightstone

SpaceManiac started work on continuing Lightstone on the [4th of June 2011](https://github.com/GlowstoneMC/Glowstone/commit/6fe0dfbea37e0f9478de89c3b91b554bf4358b17), with plans to implement the Bukkit API and therefore allow Bukkit plugins. The project was named Glowstone, due to it being the new name for the Lightstone block which the original project was named after. Glowstone continued the goal of achieving a server without any Mojang code, and the project is still alive today.

### Spout

A few months after the Glowstone project started up again, the Spoutcraft team abandoned Spoutcraft in favour of writing a custom server based on Glowstone. The team then rebranded again as Spout and forked Glowstone. Spout also had its own rewritten game client as well, and a plugin for the Spout server called Vanilla that allowed Minecraft clients to connect. Due to the extremely ambitious goals of the project, it never gained feature parity with Spoutcraft nor Minecraft and was eventually abandoned towards the end of 2013.

Later in the year, on the [4th of October](https://github.com/cuberite/cuberite/commit/e0bae05ed4cea2095718b93e211eaae3d41e8dc4), the Cuberite project was started. Like Glowstone, Cuberite is also still around today. The goal of Cuberite was to offer a very high-performance game server, using a custom-written server in C++. Cuberite servers are mostly aimed at minigames that don’t require full conformance with Minecraft gameplay standards, and has its own API for making plugins.

## MinecraftForge

On [July 12th 2011](https://github.com/MinecraftForge/MinecraftForge/commit/999ef3817a7ddfd21043a69f8af5dcf2c028b945), SpaceToad started the MinecraftForge project. Minecraft Forge was a spiritual successor to Risugami’s Modloader and SDK’s ModloaderMP, allowing mods to easily be written and loaded on both the server and client. MinecraftForge became the go-to platform for running a server that used mods that added content such as blocks, items, or mobs. Due to how much easier it was to write mods that supported both the server and client on MinecraftForge, it became significantly more common for mods to support multiplayer. This led to a surge in Minecraft modpacks built specifically to play with friends. While MinecraftForge did not support Bukkit plugins, the modded Minecraft community had very different needs, making this less of a problem. MinecraftForge is still around today, run by LexManos and the rest of the MinecraftForge team.

## Bukkit Matures

As the Bukkit project grew throughout 2011, a few issues had started to creep up. Permissions management in the Bukkit ecosystem was non-ideal, and the forums were outgrowing their usefulness as a place to download plugins.

### SuperPerms

Dinnerbone proposed a solution, a system in Bukkit for permissions that was colloquially known as SuperPerms (or sometimes DinnerPerms, referencing its creator). Not wanting to break the community-made permission plugins, the Bukkit permission system behaved similarly to a very cut down version of Vault, providing an official way for plugins to ask the installed permission plugin whether a player had a permission or not. This system, while widely used for permission checking now, was imperfect compared to Vault. Dinnerbone did not believe that plugins needed access to which groups a player was in, and instead suggested to use a `group.GroupName` permission check to assess group membership. Due to this decision being disagreed with by many permission plugin designers, plugins that relied on group names had to continue using Vault. Both Vault and WEPIF were updated to support the new system and kept around for the following years.

As part of the SuperPerms launch, SpaceManiac also launched a new permissions plugin that implemented SuperPerms as an example. The new plugin, PermissionsBukkit, was started on the [2nd of July 2011](https://github.com/SpaceManiac/PermissionsBukkit/commit/27e82705b7fab75e76b7b7fb9b42e55b86992f40) and launched on the [17th of July](https://github.com/Bukkit/Bukkit/commit/914da8e887deaadb57be339aa2dbb78eca2742a4) alongside SuperPerms inclusion in Bukkit.

### BukkitDev

The Bukkit team still had to fix the growing problem with the plugin releases section of the forums, especially as their Fill plugin repository was nowhere to be seen. After discussing a partnership with Curse, the Bukkit team announced the launch of BukkitDev on the [25th of August 2011](https://dev.bukkit.org/news/644-welcome-to-bukkitdev). Initial reactions were mixed. Many were positive about the capabilities of the new system, while others were reluctant to change and cautious about Curse. A few fears were raised regarding how Curse has treated other Minecraft community sites, as well as how the bukkit.org domain name registration was transferred to Curse. Over time, all active plugins migrated over from the Bukkit forums to BukkitDev, and the plugin releases section of the forums was locked.
